---
title: 'The Lost Art of the Mid-Range'
date: 2019-09-25
permalink: /posts/2019/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - sports
---

The rise of analytics in the NBA has led to the realization that *mid-range shots* (those that come from outside of the key but inside of the three-point line) are a relatively inefficient way to score points. This has resulted in a [league-wide abandonment of the mid-range jumper](https://flowingdata.com/2019/01/15/goodbye-mid-range-shot/) in favor of a [tremendous increase in three-point shots](https://www.theringer.com/nba/2019/2/27/18240583/3-point-boom-nba-daryl-morey). Now, I am all for using statistics to be better at sports, but those of us that watched legends like Michael Jordan or Dirk Nowitzki in their heyday can't help but feel a pang of sadness. Rationality be damned, seeing Kobe Bryant shoot an off-balance long two over a defender's outstretched hands was pure magic. Moments like that are the reason people watch basketball in the first place.

Unfortunately, although I am a basketball romantic, mathematics is definitely not. It simply makes very little sense for a player to shoot from, say, 23 feet away from the basket (worth 2 points) instead of 25 feet away from the basket (worth 3 points). The chances of making shots at those two distances are comparable, but one distance has a 50% higher point reward. So, we can expect the mid-range to continue floundering in obscurity. This reality, after all, is dictated by the rules of the game. But...what if, just for fun, we changed the rules?

The New Math of the Bizarro NBA
======
Legend has it that Antoine Walker was once asked why he shot so many three pointers. His response: "Because there are no fours". Walker himself was not a great shooter, but he raises an interesting point: what if shots were worth something besides two or three points? After all, it seems fair that a 28-foot shot should be worth more than a 24-foot shot which should be worth more than a 15-foot shot. 

Imagine an alternate Bizarro universe, where Bizarro NBA Commissioner Adam Silver proclaims that in the 2019-2020 season of the Bizarro NBA, shot values will be adjusted. One can imagine more lines added to the court to indicate a four-point distance, a 2.5-point distance, etc. But that would look terrible and is in fact not at all necessary. Modern video technology (SPORT VU LINK) can track all ten players on the court for every minute of every game, and so we can know where on the floor each shot originated from. This allows us to ask the question: **what if the value of every NBA shot was determined by the exact distance of the shot from the hoop?**

Let's say that a shot taken right underneath the hoop is worth the old familiar 2 points, and that a shot taken exactly at the three-point line at the top of the key is worth 3 points. 

\\(
N(x) = 2 + cx
\\)

where \\( N \\) is the new shot value, \\( x \\) is the distance from the shooter to the hoop, \\( c \\) is a constant defined so that a 23.75 foot shoot is worth exactly 3 points (i.e. \\( N(23.75) = 3 \\) ).


BNBA All-Stars
======

We can look at the last several seasons and see which current NBA players would benefit (or suffer) the most from this bizarro point system. 

COMPARISON OF INDIVIDUAL PLAYERS
-Plot of average shot distance vs point gain (size of marker by shot count)
-Ranking of top ten players before and after (per game? total?)
-Ranking of top ten gainers/losers (as percentage gain from average)

Of course, one demographic that this new points system does not help is big men with traditional post-up games (think Shaquille O'Neal). Their shots tend to have a low average distance and therefore have a low average value. For various reasons, this group is already diminishing in numbers in the NBA (LINK).


COMPARISON OF TEAMS
-Plot of team average shot distance vs point gain (interactive plot with ability to pick different seasons?)
-Ranking of top ten scoring offenses before and after
-Ranking of top ten gainers/losers


CONCLUSIONS

Technical Details
------
Code used for gathering data, analysis, and plot generation can be found here (LINK TO GITHUB). The data for this project was collected using the stats.nba.com API, and the analysis was done using standard Python packages.

I thought a lot about whether I should normalize the bizarro points system to the real one. E.g., I could make \\( c \\) equal to whatever value allowed the total number of real points scored from field goals to be equal to the total number of bizarro points scored from field goals. This allows for the PPG stats to be compared on the same exact scale between the two points systems, and also keeps the relative importance of free throws constant (for calculating efficiency metrics). In the end I decided against this for two reasons. First, there are two parameters to vary in the equation for \\( N(x) \\), and it was not clear the best way to pick. Second, I wanted to preserve the intuitive nature of the boundary conditions described above. 

For drawing the court lines in the shot charts, I used code from Savvas Tjortjoglou (LINK).





