---
title: 'The Lost Art of the Mid-Range'
date: 2019-09-25
permalink: /posts/2019/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - sports
---

The rise of analytics in the NBA has led to the realization that *mid-range shots* (that come from outside of the key but inside of the three-point line) are a relatively inefficient way to score points. This has resulted in a [league-wide abandonment of the mid-range jumper](https://flowingdata.com/2019/01/15/goodbye-mid-range-shot/) in favor of a [tremendous increase in three-point shots](https://www.theringer.com/nba/2019/2/27/18240583/3-point-boom-nba-daryl-morey). Now, I am all for , but those of us that watched Michael Jordan or Drik Nowitzki in their heyday can't help but feel a pang of sadness. Rationality be damned, seeing Kobe Bryant shoot an long and off-balance two point shot over a defender's outstretched hands was pure magic. Moments like that are the reason people watch basketball in the first place.

Unfortunately, although I am a basketball romantic, mathematics is definitely not. It simply makes very little sense for a player to shoot from 20 feet away from the basket (worth 2 points) instead of 24 feet away from the basket (worth 3 points). The shot percentages at those two distances are comparable, but one has a 50% higher point reward. So, we can expect the mid-range to continue floundering in obscurity. This reality, after all, is dictated by the rules of the game. But...what if, just for fun, we changed the rules?

The New Math of the Bizarro NBA
======
Legend has it that Antoine Walker was once asked why he shot so many three pointers. His response: "Because there are no fours". Walker himself was actually quite a bad shooter, but he raises an interesting point: what if shots could be worth some value besides two or three points? After all, it's only fair that a 28-point shot should be worth more than a 24-point shot which should be worth more than a 15-point shot. 

Let us imagine an alternate Bizarro universe, where Bizarro Adam Silver proclaims that in the 2019-2020 season of the Bizarro NBA (BNBA), shot values will be adjusted account for difficulty. One can imagine more lines on the court to indicate a four-point distance or a 1.5-point distance. But that would look terribly cluttered and is in fact not at all necessary. Modern video technology can track all ten players on the court for every minute of every game, and so we can know where on the floor each shot originated from. This allows us to ask the question: **what if the value of every NBA shot was determined by the exact distance of the shot from the hoop?**

You can have many headings
======

Technical Details
------
The data for this project was gathered using the stats.nba.com API.

I thought a lot about whether I should normalize the new points system. E.g., I could make \\( c \\) equal to whatever value allowed the total number of real points scored from field goals to be equal to the total number of new points scored from field goals. This allows for the PPG stats to be compared on the same exact scale. 